JUDY WOODRUFF: And now to the
day's other big story, and
that is the collapse of Senate
Republican efforts to
pass a health care bill.
A last-ditch effort
for a partial repeal of
Obamacare failed by a
single vote early today,
frustrating Republican
leaders and the president.
Lisa Desjardins
begins our coverage.
LISA DESJARDINS: President Trump
today showed no sign of backing
down, despite the stunning
Senate defeat.
DONALD TRUMP, President of
the United States: They should
have approved health care last
night, but you can't
have everything.
Boy, oh, boy.
They have been working on
that one for seven years.
Can you believe that?
The swamp.
But we will get it done.
We're going get it done.
LISA DESJARDINS: At an event for
police officers in Ronkonkoma,
New York, he was blunt.
DONALD TRUMP: You
know, I said from the
beginning, let Obamacare
implode, and then do it.
I turned out to be right.
Let Obamacare implode.
(CHEERING AND APPLAUSE)
LISA DESJARDINS: All this after
the Senate's overnight drama.
Outside the Capitol stood
a crowd of protesters.
Inside, around 10:00 p.m.
Last night, Republicans had
just released their bill, and
Democrats like Chris Murphy
were irate that the vote on
it was in just two hours.
SEN.
CHRIS MURPHY (D), Connecticut:
This is nuclear-grade bonkers,
what is happening here tonight.
LISA DESJARDINS: Hawaii Democrat
Mazie Hirono, now being treated
for kidney cancer, added
a personal dimension.
SEN.
MAZIE HIRONO (D), Hawaii: I
lost a sister to pneumonia
when she was only 2 years old
in Japan.
She died at home, so I know
how important health care is.
What I don't get is why
every single senator
doesn't know that know that.
LISA DESJARDINS: A frustrated
Senator Mike Enzi, Republican
of Wyoming, said Democrats
offered only complaints.
SEN.
MICHAEL B. ENZI (R),
Wyoming: And I started
hearing, it's not perfect.
It's not perfect.
Well, where are the
suggestions for making it
as near perfect as possible?
LISA DESJARDINS: And so, shortly
after midnight, a first vote
began, with Democrats somber
and in their seats.
On the opposite side,
slowly arriving Republicans
were more social.
But something notable, Alaska
Senator Lisa Murkowski walked
over to Arizona's John McCain,
and he signaled a thumbs down.
Murkowski, along with Susan
Collins of Maine, were
two expected no votes.
Soon, Vice President Mike Pence
stepped over, shook hands and
then spent a long 20 minutes
apparently trying to
win McCain's vote.
Minutes later, another signal.
McCain walked over to Democrats.
A large group surrounded him.
Nearby, GOP Leader Mitch
McConnell walked the other way,
just as McCain was embraced
by California's
Dianne Feinstein.
The final vote resembled a
great sporting event, Democrats
on their feet as McCain walked
up to vote.
Some, like Massachusetts'
Elizabeth Warren,
leaned to watch him.
And he signaled his vote
with a simple thumbs down.
(APPLAUSE)
LISA DESJARDINS: Democrats
gasped and clapped,
before their leader waved
them off and stopped
the applause.
Outside, protesters
did not hold back.
It all marked a seismic shift
in momentum and emotions.
SEN.
MITCH MCCONNELL (R-KY), Majority
Leader: This is, you know,
clearly a disappointing moment.
LISA DESJARDINS: Republican
Leader McConnell thanked his
side and slammed Democrats.
SEN.
MITCH MCCONNELL: Now, I imagine
many of our colleagues on the
other side are celebrating.
I think the American people are
going to regret that we couldn't
find a better way forward.
And, as I said, we look forward
to our colleagues on the other
side suggesting what they have
in mind.
LISA DESJARDINS: As the
night turned to day,
bipartisan calls grew louder.
Democratic Minority Leader Chuck
Schumer said his party is ready.
SEN.
CHUCK SCHUMER (D-NY),
Minority Leader: I hope
we can work together to
make the system better
in a bipartisan way.
And I'm optimistic
that that can happen.
Nobody has said
Obamacare is perfect.
Nobody has said our health care
system doesn't need fixing.
LISA DESJARDINS: So,
where does that begin?
Likely with a return to the
traditional committee process.
JUDY WOODRUFF: And Lisa
joins me now for more,
along with Sarah Kliff.
She's a senior policy
correspondent for the Web site
Vox, and she covers health care.
And you were with us last night.
And we wanted to have you
both with us again tonight.
So, Lisa, what a lot of drama.
You were up most of the
night covering that.
Where do things stand?
Where do they go from here?
LISA DESJARDINS: It seems like
the idea is that perhaps they
can get help from the Health
Committee, which is the
Health, Labor and Pensions
Committee in the Senate.
One reason for that, Judy,
not just because its covers
health care, but because of its
leaders.
Senator Lamar Alexander
of Tennessee is the
Republican chairman,
and the ranking Democrat
is Patty Murray, both of them
senior members of their party
who thought are of very highly
and who have done
bipartisan deals before.
Senator Alexander is
planning hearings.
And they're hoping that
something comes of this
in the way of legislation.
Also, Judy, there were
conversations on and off
the floor last night.
Senator Perdue told me already
Republicans and Democrats
speaking with each other.
But they all have
one problem still.
Unclear what could pass.
It seemed like last night's
vote was very close, but the
truth is, Judy, is that McCain
was expressing something
a lot of Republicans felt.
This bill was far short of a
number of people who really
wanted it to become law.
JUDY WOODRUFF: So, what
are the roadblocks?
Is it figuring out the policy?
Because I have had people
say to me, well, if you could
just put folks in a room and
not worry about politics,
you could get it done.
But you're suggesting
it's not that simple.
LISA DESJARDINS: It's
complicated because
Republicans have tried
to put a lot of together
different ideas together here.
For one, Planned Parenthood,
defunding Planned Parenthood
has been part of that.
That's something that
Susan Collins and Lisa
Murkowski haven't liked.
There is an idea that, if they
pared it down and focused on
fixing the Affordable Care
Act, that perhaps, perhaps
they can come up with
some ideas they share.
But this is just less than 24
hours after things fell apart.
But that is the hope right now.
JUDY WOODRUFF: Well, let's talk
about what's at stake as they
figure this out, Sarah Kliff,
because, until there is new
legislation, the Affordable
Care Act is in effect.
It's out there.
What's going to happen to it?
SARAH KLIFF, Vox: That
is a fantastic question,
and you're right.
There are millions of
people who get coverage
through the Affordable
Care Act, particularly
through the marketplaces.
These are people who buy
private insurance, often
with tax subsidies,.
And we are expecting some pretty
significant premium increases
unless we have some kind
of changes in policy from
the Trump administration.
They have done some things
to increase uncertainty.
And when insurance companies
sense uncertainty, they
react by raising prices.
And that's what we're seeing
in the marketplaces right now.
JUDY WOODRUFF: What
are insurance companies
- - I know it's only
been not even 24 hours
since this happened, but
what's your understanding,
from having reported on
this for a long time,
that insurance
companies need to have?
What are they looking for
as Congress works its way
through at this point?
SARAH KLIFF: They're going
to be looking for two things.
They want to know that
the individual mandate,
the requirement to
carry health insurance,
that will be enforced by
the Trump administration.
Even though the Trump
administration has been
negative on that provision,
they want to know
that they will tell people, if
you don't buy insurance, there
is a fine because they think
that gets healthy people
to sign up for coverage.
They also want a guarantee
from President Trump that he
will continue paying threat
cost-sharing
reduction subsidies.
It's this $8 million --
or $8 billion -- excuse me
-- fund that helps offset
co-pays for low-income
Americans.
They don't know if they're
going to get that money.
And they want a
guarantee on that.
JUDY WOODRUFF: And, meantime,
Lisa, what the president has
said -- in fact, he said it
- - was tweeting this morning
and last night - - let Obamacare
implode, which sounds like
he's not going to be
putting any money out there.
LISA DESJARDINS: Right, nor does
it sound like he necessarily
wants to enforce the individual
or employer mandates.
So that's a real question
for Congress now.
Does Congress take action
to force, for example,
those cost-sharing
reductions, that $8 billion,
I think it's $10
billion next year?
Does Congress fund
that on its own?
There are many Republicans
would like to do that, but they
know that anything right now
in Congress like that
is a heavy lift, but it
is in the conversation.
JUDY WOODRUFF: Is there --
Sarah, as you talk to folks out
there in the health care world,
whether it's insurance
companies, hospitals,
and the others, are they
coming up with another
approach at all this?
Are they standing back
with their fingers crossed?
How do they look
at this right now?
SARAH KLIFF: The insurance
companies in particular
have been quite vocal,
really less vocal in
the repeal fight, and much
more vocal on stabilization.
They keep talking about
the cost-sharing reduction
subsidies, about the
individual mandate.
Even just today, after we saw
repeal fail, we saw this flurry
of letters from insurance
companies saying, we need
stabilization right now.
And we are getting
close to the deadline.
Insurance companies
have to decide in about
September if they're going
to sell on healthcare.gov
or not.
And these are assurances
they are asking before they
sign those contract letters.
JUDY WOODRUFF: So, if they're
on that kind of timeline,
Lisa, it takes Congress a while
to get things done.
They did have at least some
recess coming in August.
What does the timeline
look like there and what
about House members?
They have had an even more
conservative position on
this than in the Senate.
LISA DESJARDINS: The Senate
is in session two more weeks.
That's part of the August
recess that they rolled back.
So, I don't expect major action,
but perhaps conversations
can tart happening that give
us an idea of whether
something tangible is
possible in September.
As for the House, Speaker Ryan
put out a statement saying he
was disappointed and frustrated.
But I think the real feelings
of House members were expressed
better by Diane Black of the
Budget Committee, who lashed
out at the Senate, said it was
a slap in the face of what the
House had done.
And it seems like that is
going to be a real problem in
the two chambers trusting each
other in the future.
There is some hope that they
could do something by September,
but I'm not sure what that's
based on, to be honest.
JUDY WOODRUFF: Yes, I think
people -- a lot of people, it
seems to me, Sarah, are standing
back saying, can the two
parties work together now, when
clearly the Republicans, acting
on their own, it didn't happen?
SARAH KLIFF: And lot of it,
honestly, rests with the Trump
administration at this point.
They are creating a
lot of the uncertainty.
And it's been interesting
to watch their Health
and Human Services
Department, which has kind
of acted as an attack shop
on the Affordable Care Act.
They send press releases every
time an insurance company quits
the marketplace or raises its
rates and they send
these and say, look, this
is why we need repeal.
I am watching to see if they
change their tactics now
that the repeal bill seems to
be dead and say, yes, we won't
repeal, but, in the meantime, we
kind of -- we run healthcare.gov
right now, and we want to make
it work as well as we can.
We don't know if we're
going to see that shift.
And if we do, it would really
be a 180 from how they have
treated the Affordable Care
Act so far.
JUDY WOODRUFF: So much
of the ball is in the
administration's court,
the Trump administration's
court, as we wait to
see what Congress does.
Thank you both, an
extraordinary story to follow.
Sarah Kliff, our own Lisa
Desjardins, thank you.